but I mean it's you know when you think
about it they're trying to feel alive
and they were in a situation where they
can't feel alive you know they can't
feel the normal play their instincts
I would say for me as a human being when
I was a child I felt that way too I
often did feel literally caged you know
I think a lot of us do but maybe some of
us your memory doesn't go back far
enough but when you're a small child we
also grow up in very unnatural settings
even if they're comfortable zoos I never
saw the film but I do remember we
discussed it right there's there's this
one if there's if I were to go back and
do a J cosmic video again there's one
guy who I would make a response to and I
so got sicker the response videos like
it was just for in a big way like the
zoo stuff it's such a part of my life
it's not positive part of my life
there's so many reasons and just got the
point where I was like I don't want to
talk about this anymore
like I for so many reasons other than
I've done I've been doing made so many
videos on it like it's stolen talked
about but if I was to make another one
there's this one guy he's a former
SeaWorld trainer
his name is Kyle Kittleson and he has a
youtube and is his a big video is that
he talked about like basically
everything that was wrong with blackfish
but he approaches the subject like from
this perspective that someone that
animal rights activist has no idea what
they're talking about specifically
because they don't work with animals on
an everyday basis now like from my
perspective I essentially think he's
deluding himself in his own way yeah cuz
you know working with zookeepers there
there are so many things that you you
convince yourself the Burin about your
relationship of the animals and what you
know about the animals that no one can
know because they've never worked with
them and it's interesting because the
it's the same with traditional farmers
and traditional hunters they always
think they understand the mind of the
animal they've made up stories to
explain their behavior and yeah yeah
yeah that's a real that's I mean
sense its psychological projection
although not the way we normally talk
about psychological projection yeah yeah
I know exactly what you're talking about
yeah go on um the first the first video
I remember they showed me like
orientation day for zookeepers they show
you this video and it's basically this
guy who talks about this this horrible
experience where he he witnessed his um
his friend and fellow zookeeper get
attacked by a zebra zebras are one of
those animals that I think a lot of
people think are harmless they're
absolutely super dangerous Morris isn't
like I don't know how much you know
about horses and stuff like that but
zebras are notorious for like you have
to have multiple water containers in
their exhibit because there are
particularly like protective water and
like you know you have to do all this
stuff with the females around the males
and stuff like that because they do like
a whole harem thing and stuff like that
and they're you know they get in fights
it can be bad like he had this
experience where his keepers attacked by
a zookeeper and he talks about what it
did and what the repercussions were what
he didn't do and what he wishes he had
done and one of the reflections he has
is that you know you might think you
know an animal but all you can really
say is like that animal has never done
X&Y before so it's basically like
complete reflection that you start out
with that completely flies in the face
of basing your assumptions that you
build up for the years going on from
there like what what this animal is
capable of and what they're not but I
remember like there were some surreal
beliefs that zoo keepers had people who
had been there and for like in the field
for a really long time like I remember
one I remember sitting at the lunchroom
table and these two keepers talking
about how stereotypical you know stress
behavior pacing back and forth was
exercise no it's exercise that's how
they get exercise yeah and you know
though they're the only animals that and
I remember like um there's this there's
a porcupine that lived at the zoo too
and remembered she would do this thing
where she would go to the back corner
and she would do like this is like
dancing movement the swinging side to
side looking at the back exhibit not
facing anything total neurotic behavior
yeah I remember they we would call it Oh
her happy dance she's doing the happy
that's like just to come here to no one
acknowledge that you're completely
taking the edge of something serious
don't really wanted to acknowledge it
that actually this animal is being
deprived of the habitat habitat it needs
to have normal behaviors and normal even
mental health yeah can I mention one
example of that that I saw on the zoo
and conveying because it was interesting
me I was there with my teacher as a
translator basically and me and my
teacher both picked up on how sad it was
we saw a red to panda so the red panda
is much smaller than the black-and-white
panda it's a very different species but
that's we call them red panda and black
Amanda and as a red panda in a tiny
enclosure that was basically like a
fence circling a tree so it's just a
tree less than one meter on every side
of the tree like maybe half a meter of
space when he said serrated victory and
then a little ladder I could go up to
like a little tree house in the tree
that looked cute look at human kids tree
house and you know we could actually see
this red panda running in circles in its
tiny habitat and I think it's not too
much to say that it was trying to cheer
itself up before going it's very very
hurt for me to describe the the
behaviour but also but also it was
avoiding looking at the humans you know
which was very telling and I've seen
that with animals sometimes you know
with chickens when you kill one chicken
and then none of the other chickens are
looking at you when you slaughter the
chicken or they're never they don't
they're looking away from the humans
they were avoiding making eye contact or
avoiding making eye contact with the
chicken that's that's gonna be killed or
as screaming and dying you can see
chickens looking away but this the
nature of this enclosure was so exposed
but yeah it was really sad I'm soul just
interesting that me and her both picked
up on it cuz in a sense you know it says
you like you were saying it's like a
seemingly cheerful movement but you
could see this this this animal was so
used to living in this tiny enclosure
and being on display all the time that
it had developed these repetitive
behaviors obsess you just call them
obsessive or neurotic
behaviors of trying to trying to make
the best of its its cage yeah and you
know where and the other tragedy is
there right it's like you never know
because intelligence varies a lot within
one species of animal people know that
with dog is one dog can be much more
intelligent than another our family dog
I had as a kid actually could understand
quite a few words of the English
language not that uncommon we you know
any why would you say it wasn't
unusually intelligent dog in some ways
would do you know was it was miserable
for that reason it was much more unhappy
because it was more intelligent but you
wonder you look at that it's like to
what extent does this red panda
understand you know what it's doing yeah
the worst-case neuroticism that I ever
saw was exactly the kind of cage that
you described it's probably another
scientific classification that belongs
to but it's like it's like a small like
rat it's like a it's like a South
American raccoon basically and it um it
was it would literally do the same
motion over and over again and the night
the head roll is the worst when they
they'll climb a little bit on the cage
they'll do like this twist of the body
to get back into position to go to the
other side of the cage like it's just
there's no purpose for that movement at
all unless you're like struggling as
like a capture and like like injured
about to die animal but I mean it's you
know when you think about it they're
trying to feel alive and they were in a
situation where they can't feel alive
you know they can't feel the normal
player their instincts now I would say
for me as a human being when I was a
child I felt that way too I often did
feel literally caged you know I think a
lot of us do but maybe some of us our
memory doesn't go back far enough but
when you're a small child we also grow
up in very unnatural settings even if
they're comfortable I think that part of
us also is rebelling against that or is
looking for a kind of stimulus or free
play of the instincts which would
include the experience of fear you know
include you know unpleasant experiences
and you know fear of predators and
what-have-you but we're growing up
that dad would say I knew I knew one
woman in Cambodia who told me she
described what it was like growing up
with Tigers wild tigers in the jungle of
Cambodia she was the last generation to
have that experience where literally you
know she had to to guard herself against
Tigers when she walked to school every
day you know Tigers still eight people
in her village and she was too shy
I'm laughing about it but that doesn't
exist in Cambodia anymore and in the
whole world you know there's a couple of
places in India where humans I could
slip together but in terms of
evolutionary time that's what a lot of
us grew up with right like that's what
we're evolved to grow up with is looking
over your shoulder you know and not for
the schoolyard bully exercise because
they're like you know a predator as well
they live in the same range but you know
I think in reality these are animals
we're all the worst cases we're always
in with really extreme levels of
interaction with something like the Cody
that I was talking about you know they
live in giant groups right like hundreds
of individuals and this is a small like
cage of this animal and a mountain lion
you know they'll range you know some of
them some of those big cats will have
you know bears - they'll have really
large ranges and these these were
relatively small cages like like your
one out of 100,000 like like that some
tiny fraction of like what their actual
range was you know somebody said I just
wanna say you know a mind with a human
mind or an animal mind a mind in a
vacuum tends to resemble that vacuum you
know a large part of what our mind does
is like a mirror and you know you you
know the myth it's a total lie there's a
total lie that's commonly believed that
you know the goldfish has such a short
memory that it's never bored inside a
goldfish bowl because like you know
every few seconds it's you know
it doesn't know where it is have you
heard that lie that's a commonly told
lie to children that oh don't worry
though don't worry the goldfish are
happy just swimming back and forth and
they're in the same bowl it not only is
it untrue you know when scientists
researched it they have a photographic
memory and can map out huge areas of the
ocean floor and that's what they're
evolved to do is range over this big big
area with complex three-dimensional
habitats and you know we also be
watching for predator self the time that
no actually you know the the wild form
that the goldfish has quite impressive
mental faculties and then you know you
take them and you deprive them of that
even when we're not talking about
castration and declawing and these other
elements yeah I think that's the tragedy
of and I say look I mean you know I
don't know if I'm flattering myself or
insulting myself but I am in some ways
burdened with very accurate memory of
childhood and I can relate to some of
that in terms of my own experience as a
mammal fact like the cow Kittleson guy
like sure the things that he explicitly
says in his video that I find
particularly ridiculous to see he
literally says you know he talks about
this story about how you know the killer
whales because that's what he did he
worked with he literally worked with
these killer whales at SeaWorld from the
blackfish movie and he talks about how
oh we would open up the bigger you know
tanks for them to go in and they would
stay in the small ones so that means to
me that no they don't they wouldn't want
to go to an open water pen you know that
would be he literally says that would be
the worst possible scenario yeah and
it's just it boggles my mind a little
bit there whether I've met people who
you know they're zookeepers have biology
degrees you know they've studied the
sciences you know my kid Olson is
someone who you know his background is
in theater which is not actually that
uncommon it's such a in some ways it's
such a low paying job that you know you
get people who you know who are art
students who love animals who are you
know they they get it they understand
animals they grew up with animals that
you know they get in that career path
calculon's really good at what he do I'm
sure he's an amazing trainer I'm sure
the dog that he trained
to get the beer from the fridge for his
master a function that like of things
you could teach enable to do to get them
something that actually destroys the
brain of the taken away yeah but but
he's sitting there and he's like you
know I've eight years experience and
this is my conclusion that the worst
possible thing from a biological and
ethical standpoint would be to allow
these animals in an open water tank like
the things that like professional people
convince themselves up that they have
all this experience around these animals
this is absolutely ridiculous yeah I
agree with you but I think that's part
of the the myth making self
justification side of the human mind and
I can really remember in terms of my own
maturation for me it was really a
conscious decision not to live that way
it's like I'm not gonna make up excuses
I'm not gonna make up justifications but
for a lot of people that's what their
whole ethical system hangs on whether it
has to do with you know keeping a whale
in a bathtub
or you know here in China you know
justifications for mass murder for
millions of people dying and the role
they may feel they played in it or that
their parents played in it or what have
you or that they're playing a part in
right now just being part of the society
don't worry we can stick with zoos we
don't have to talk about we don't talk
about asthma don't worry the manager I
remember I talked to you about the
manager who would storm out in the
meeting room about the cage in a cage
he actually had this is one really
awesome lucid moment that I remember
like vividly like literally like the
moment the most common things do keepers
talk about around the lunch tables is a
pup a negative and that a negative
turned positive interaction with with a
guest who you know comes to you and
they're like the animals are living in
such horrible conditions here you know I
can't believe that this is happening and
you know it always has the same path it
seems it goes you know you talk about
talk about conservation you know there's
all the animals who are a part of some
conservation program
you know I mean I've had the iPad I've
worked with animals that were part of
conservation programs that were
literally sick on a daily basis and it's
like are these animals ever gonna go
back to wild and I remember like you
know one day one day he was just like he
was listening this conversation about
conversation and about conservation like
this interaction he was like kind of
like stop stop you know I think on some
level he was just his whole point was I
think on some level you know the most
thing that we can say to these people is
we're doing the best we can and you know
there I've had arguments with people on
Facebook because especially on Facebook
there's this clear divide that people
had in their minds you know sanctuaries
are goods whose are bad and you know all
I'll say to people you know 90% of
people work in zoos have biology degrees
they have you know yours agree to this
you know see Roald especially all those
whales cow Kittleson is right they have
10 vet staff to take care of each of
those whales like from my pure health
standpoint like that probably the best
care in the world
and you know these are people on a daily
basis you know I remember a vet told me
once you know the the best vet I ever
worked with he said he said you know
from my standpoint you know the best
vets have to realize in some level the
people work with these animals on a
daily basis you know they really view
them as their pets I just think I just
think they're so similar like in a lot
of ways that vegans are not willing to
recognize and I think zoos have some
things going for them and sanctuaries
have some things going for him and I
don't think they're that different but I
I think I was definitely the first vegan
on YouTube to challenge the paradigm you
just mentioned you just summarized it as
situate but I wonder it's possible I'm
the first vegan even in print you know
because the written history of veganism
is not that long and that's that's
certainly an obscure and edgy enough
issue it's possible no other vegan
took the stand I did would you basically
basically is anti sanctuary and you know
I mean the thing with zoos I've
repeatedly drawn attention to this
concept of obsolescence most recently in
the video boat economics where I say
look we're not gonna make vivisection
obsolete I'd love it if we could but
that's not situation right now
I don't think we're gonna make sues
obsolete you know in that sense you know
the circus we can get rid of this is
this is the difference in the zoo in the
circus and blackfish was out it's
possible I read message you but said
nothing anything one of my professors in
Canada he was at the elite level of
whale activism
so specifically West Coast killer whales
you know he'd made documentary films and
stuff he had connections in government
and whatever you know see was he was a
long time involved in that and I I made
some comment to him I said well now that
now that this movie blackfish has come
out won't there be pressure on you to
kind of never talk to and never
cooperate with the people at SeaWorld
again and I'm sorry if I'm getting the
name wrong I think the park there is
SeaWorld if it's not SeaWorld it's
another it's a competitor that's very
similar to SeaWorld but you know there's
a park like that on the west coast there
and he turned to me with no pause
without missing a beat and he said that
park that amusement park that no
exploits whales or whatever he said that
is the only infrastructure the
government has to deal with sick or
injured whales and it was created by
this private sector company you know so
they could put on these acrobatic shows
there whatever these these exploitative
shows he says that's all we've got
if there's ever a problem if there's
ever a no great break and you know he
has all these statistics you know the
West Coast pod is down to its last seven
reproducing females you know I mean
they're on the edge of extinction blah
blah blah just just in that area he said
our only capacity to do something good
to help you know ensure the the future
of this species actually depends on that
Park so that was a shock to me I wasn't
expecting to say anything like that I
was expecting him to make some kind of
catty remark that
yeah he's you know he'd like to see
SeaWorld burn but no on
on the contrary he said that's all with
God so that was interesting and you know
I'm sure in terms of the the
conservation role that some zoos do play
and in theory all all zoos can play
there will be parallels to that with
other species and I I've told ya you you
you gotta study bugs at that video we
have these unique species of monkey here
in here in Yan'an right on the on the
edge of extinction because they only eat
they only eat moss right the bulk of
their diet is moss remember that like it
like it thank you thank you thank you
see you don't get a mixed up you can't
feed a moss it's got these these alike
and eating monkeys of alter it for
eating lichen and like it's grim as hell
seeing them in zoos those monkey it is
it is I wish I could say nothing is
grimmer the grimmest here are the
elephants seeing the elephants here in
China that's that's really more you know
more moving than Dante's Inferno or
Dante's purgatory I mean it's really
hell to see the elephants in in Chains
here and makes you you know that that
makes you wanna that makes you want to
resort to violence seeing the elephants
of that here so I'm starting it's here
I'm starting to tear up thinking about
I'm starting to cry thinking about the
situation of the elephants yeah but I
mean that's you know anyway look you
know but as terrible situation is with
zoos and I've seen zoos here that are
terrible I mentioned in a recent video I
don't know if you caught it yet you know
the the Tigers literally with with
pieces of meat dangling from from
fishing lines did you catch that yet I
[Laughter]
[Music]
know they were there were strips of raw
meat they weren't cooked me so they were
raw meat but yeah go up
like that one it's a more about image
watching what's surreal go watching that
video watching that video in particular
seem to tell you with a hot dog on a
stick because I've actually had the
experience like of talking to people who
have paid like I don't know how much you
charge for this piece of meat on a stick
but I've I didn't ask what they would
have sold me one I've had the experience
talking to people who just got to see
like the most endangered the rarest
canine on the unearth the Mexican gray
wolf okay and like you know they paid I
don't even know if they paid five bucks
for we gave you know there was there was
at Cal in California we gave this group
like this campsite this really great
deal to see these really like endangered
animals and I remember I remember you
know having conversation of the people
like oh this wasn't for free not only
does your money go to see these really
rare animals but like it actually goes
to an organization that is not for
profit that is like actually involved in
conversations like we I could literally
say see those cages back there those
wolves who go to the wild they will
literally live in the wild they will
literally have pups in the wild
you are literally seeing a part of a
program that is actually bringing a
species it was a hot dog on a stick yeah
you know I met the thing I loved about
it was the world wildlife management
paradigm you know basically I want
animals to live in their own domain you
know what I mean I basically want all
the animals to be treated like sharks
you know what I mean it's okay I mean
you know it's okay to watch them in a
documentary it's okay to stand on the
edge of the shore and look in but I mean
you know I wish I wish we had more of a
more of an attitude like this in Western
culture but it's obviously it's not at
all the puppy centered attitude instead
is people want to interact with the
animals
play with the animals they want to see
if they get a reaction out of them and
yeah I have seen people here in China
with you know bears in cages and the
cage isn't that much bigger than the
bear you get a great huge bear poking at
the Bears with sticks and forcing
through food to try to get a reaction of
the bear you know little little pieces
of meat or hotdogs or whatever they had
trying to try to interact with the with
the bear in these ways but hey I don't
know I mean when my father was a child
we literally had you know bear wrestling
in Canada and you know bears and cages
for that for humans getting in and
wrestling the Bears and that kind of
stuff so yeah I mean it's not you know
what happened Gary Yourofsky a lot of
people who are involved in the animal
rights side of things they get more and
more misanthropic until they just end up
hating the human race because they see
this side of human nature for too long
right but look I hope I hope it's
something positive you can carry with
you I don't know how I'll ever come back
into your life but you had this period
of your life
when zoos and habitat conservation and
this kind of work with animals was was
really your main thing maybe it'll be in
your old age there'll be at some other
point but you know I hope I hope that
can come back into your life in a
meaningful way positive like because
right now basically what I do is I'm a
sub in the school systems and you know
that involves going to elementary
schools and middle schools and one of
the things that you can talk like the
kids like hearing those stories yeah
like their favorite their favorite
stories the one of the one I have about
the polar bear and it's not even a
firsthand story but on I remember the
zoo that I worked at was kind of famous
in the area because a long time ago they
had this polar bear and that was like a
big thing back then to go and see like
this white bear that you know was out in
the hot Sun in the summer like roasting
you know on the on the concrete
everyone had great stories
I in fact I remember walking around the
zoo like and I remember this what I'll
never forget this one group of yes and I
remember exactly what they said perfect
they said I'm like they were by the
llamas
they were like that's that's where
habitat conservation begins is when it's
no longer existing for human
entertainment or human exploitation when
the wilderness exists just to be the
wilderness you know and that's that's
the hardest thing for human beings to do
ultimately human beings create the
wilderness because they create a barrier
and they don't allow other human beings
to cut down the trees on the other side
of that barrier or go and hunt the
animals that very that's in the 21st
century
all wilderness is human created because
at a minimum we have to employ people to
stop the other humans from destroying it
you know that's that's the fragile
Millennium were going into now and there
was a time when I was [ __ ] up with it
there was a time when like emotionally
it was like oh my god
is this the world my children are gonna
be born into you know a world where
where there is really no wilderness and
so on but but I got over it doing the
story about the pole anyway the story
about the polar bears a brief thing that
my manager used to talk about he um
basically like when they when they would
do medicals for the animal like when
they would do like the physicals every
year they actually they couldn't dart
the polar bear but it has something to
do with their skin being so thick or
something like that that you actually
you literally can't dart them in their
hide they had to train them to get up on
the fence and a bull bear is like a huge
animal like probably the biggest bear
it's like I believe it is yeah I've seen
grizzly bears they were like ten feet
tall and stuff like that and he'd have
to get up on the fence and they'd have
to jab they'd have to jab stick him
under the armpit because that was the
only place that it was soft enough that
that that is the
favorite story of elementary school kids
I'm not sure why but that always gets
the best reaction but I have been able
to like tell some interesting stories
that not many science teachers or really
any other teacher I remember one time I
was just I was just in the eighth in the
class and I told her I was a zookeeper
and she was like oh we have to we have
to schedule 15 minutes for the kids to
ask you questions about animals mmm and
um which ended up being a little more
like 30 or 40 minutes because everyone
had it everyone and anyone had to ask
their their best and some of the Dumber
questions about animals I have a lot of
a lot of good stuff I have a lot of good
memories now talking about just talking
to kids about animals and stuff like
that and you know hearing what they
think and things like that so that's
been the most positive thing that's
recently come out of it I would have to
say or so they're talking about on
YouTube in a way yeah look I mean I'm
happy for you I just made a video
talking about the extent to which the
different like missions I was on ended
in failure and I feel like I've got
nothing positive you know to bring
forward in my life I guess I can still
speak Thai and lotion I guess coming up
pretty soon I'm going back to Thailand
so I'm gonna have to I'm gonna have to
learn that language again you know brush
up or remind myself how to speak that
language a little bit
for a while I'm in Thailand but um you
know I mean that is something paused if
you get to carry with you for the rest
of your life so I'm happy to hear that
I'm happy I'm glad you're not in the
situation where you feel like you're a
failed zoo keeper and every day you wake
up and resent that you're not you're not
getting the smell of that that Zoo poo
shoveling manure because you know that's
that's the story you're not telling the
children about that's the other reality
right is baling the hay and the the last
year I went to and could mang you could
see they did have large groups of all
the monkey species living together they
had many different species of monkey so
the monkeys weren't isolated in that
sense they were in in whole troops but
they were absolutely constantly mating
and constantly getting pregnant and
producing more monkeys and I assume
those monkeys would be sold on to other
zoos because obviously they can't they
can't have a constantly expanding monkey
population or sold on to be used for
other purposes right
whether scientific experimentation or
or what-have-you my translator she
absolutist me in China there are some
really broad laws that various kinds of
animals can just never be killed for
meat including deer
she really insists to me that in China
they dates illegal it's out to kill deer
under any circumstance or beat it like
come on you must be joking but whether
or not those laws exist I don't know
because every day you know the the
exhibits we're getting pregnant to put
it that way and you know every every
month the population would be increasing
if they weren't doing something to
export the new births or or to eliminate
them to liquidate them so yeah those
would be their choices because I wonder
like because I remember there was
there's like it's kind of a this like an
idiom about animals in captivity like
you know the you know if given the
opportunity they'll make the way they
should it's basically a way to explain
like you know meeting with their
brothers and sisters in captivity and
you know there's kind of like I think
about sounds of time but you know the
zoo aza zoos manage really well and I
don't know they've said to how they do
this you know how much space they have
for certain species of animal you know
there there are times when you literally
you literally you can't breathe you
can't breathe certain animals because
there's literally no space for anymore
like you don't have any zoos to send
them to that have the proper but that
you know that requires a lot of you know
kind of really sad things whether it's
not literally implanting an animal with
extra the outside hormones so that they
don't you know they don't have to get
pregnant when they made or just strictly
separating animals you know right next
to each other and that have you know
those you know those instincts and I
know for for Lions they have mechanical
forms of birth control where they put
they insert a device into the the female
or lion and so on I know that some of
that has been so there is an effect
birth control rather than castration or
they're more invasive you know the
equivalent of the birth control pill but
it is actually you know a mechanism
that's releasing necessary chemicals
would have you obviously it's not saying
look tuned into a great length as soon
as else cuz the extraordinary cost of
keeping lions but yeah I'd say too I
mean another sense in which I think
modern humans who are in many ways
separated from the life of the instincts
separated from the life of the wild I
think that's also you know just like the
monkeys in the cage that was just
describing in the zoo in China for those
monkeys in the cage sexuality is the
only instinct they've got left left it's
the only instinct they can still
exercise right inside that cage there's
nothing else they can they can do so
I'll guessing all their time and energy
basically goes into sex because it's the
only part of their nature that can still
exercise and I don't know I mean you
know for me living in this modern
society in this cage of my own making
that's some truth to that too we've
gotten rid of we've gotten rid of the
experience of most of the other
instincts including fear a lot of people
want to live very safe lives and never
never feel afraid and so on and I guess
more of our mental energy those into
goes into the last remaining instinct we
got a cage yeah
evolution